The theta notation defines an average bound or type bound
of a function. In big Oh notation, we have formed
the upper bound of a function and in omega
notation
We have found the lower bound of a function
Here, we need to find a function that can
even upper and lower bound to f(n)
Let us see the definition of theta notation
The function f(n) is theta of g(n)
if and only if their excess positive constant c1
c2 and n0 such that
c1*g(n) is less than or
equal to f(n) less than or equal to
c2*g(n) for all n greater than
or equal to n0. So, Let us
take the same example and find it's theta notation
f(n) equal to 5n + 3.
Let's put it in the equation
c1*g(n) is less than or equal
to 5n +3  less than or equal to
c2*g(n)
Now we need to guess the value for c1,
c2 and g(n) in such a way that
it satisfies this condition c1*g(n)
lower bound here.
we already found the value that is 1*n
c2*g(n)
is the upper bound here so we can
put 10*n here
And this relation is true for all values
n greater than or equal to 1
Let us quickly verify it
Let's take n as 1, then the equation will become 1 less
than or equal to 8 less than or equal to
It is true.
So, this equation is true for all the values of
n greater than or equal to 1
So the value of n0 is one
If we put these values the relation will become
1*n less than or equal to 5n + 3
less than or equal to 10*n
And it is true for all the values of
n greater than or equal to 1.
Here this is c1
This is g(n)
This is c2 and this again g(n)
So in the equation we have found the values of
c1, c2, g(n) and n0
and it satisfies all the conditions of Theta definition. so
we can say that five and plus three is the
theta of n
And in Big O if a function is upper bound to
n it will be upper bound to any time function
which is greater than or equal to n,
Say n^2, 2 raised n, n raised to n etc.
In omega
If your function is lower bound to n, it will
be lower bound to any time function which is lesser
than or equal to n, say logn, square root of n,
1 etc..
But in Theta
We can't say like this
When we say it theta of n it means that we're
representing it with an exact time function
If a function is an average bound to n
Its average bound to exactly n, it will not average bound
to any other time
functions like the theta of n Square, theta of 2 raised
to n because as per the definition g(n) should
be same on both sides.
We can't put n this side and N square on
the right side
So Theta is so tight and accurate
So among all three notations theta is more accurate and
useful
So when analysing the time complexity always try to find
the average bound if you find the exact time function
for the average bound represented with theta notation
If not we can go for upper or a lower
bound
So that's it for this video
In the next video let's take some sample functions and
find their asymptotic notations.